# Prologue: The Rise and Fall of Haven's Rest

In the early days, a small group of colonists settled in a valley, a temperate deciduous forest marked by a stream that seemed to offer everything they needed. The climate was moderate, with an average temperature that kept the valley comfortable through most seasons, the rainfall feeding the growth of the native oak and maple trees that dominated the landscape.

They named the settlement Haven's Rest, inspired by the shelter the valley provided them and its abundant resources. They began to build their first structures, lean-tos crafted from fallen branches and thatched with maple leaves. Within days, the settlers had explored several resource zones within the land: a dense grove of red maples, a meadow rich with berries, and exposed granite outcroppings that promised building material for stable structures that could endure the weather.

The first winter tested their resolve. The temperature dropped sharply, revealing why the local trees were predominantly hardy species like oak and hickory. The settlers learned to read the land's signs - the way the beech trees' smooth, silver-gray bark caught the winter light, how the thick layers of fallen leaves could be gathered for insulation. They discovered that the stream, fed by a natural spring, never fully froze, providing year-round water access.

As spring arrived, Haven's Rest began to flourish. The settlers established a small sawmill, processing the abundant oak into sturdy lumber. The wood was dense and strong, its legendary durability perfect for construction. They learned to rotate their timber harvesting between different groves, allowing each area time to regenerate. The granite quarry they established provided foundations for more permanent homes, while discovered coal deposits promised fuel for the coming winters.

Years passed, and Haven's Rest grew into a respectable town. They built a trading post, hoping to establish routes with other colonies. The local resource zones seemed inexhaustible - the forest continued to provide, the granite remained plentiful, and even a small vein of iron was discovered in the hills. The settlers believed they had found paradise.

But they had not accounted for the subtle warnings in the land itself. The valley's climate, while comfortable, was changing. The average rainfall began to decrease gradually, a change so slow it was almost imperceptible. The temperate deciduous forest that had sustained them began to show signs of stress. The red maples, once vibrant with their distinctive leaves, started producing smaller crowns. The beech trees, sensitive to drought, showed the first signs of decline.

The settlers had become too dependent on their initial success, too bound to the specific conditions that had first attracted them. They had built their entire economy around the resources of a temperate forest biome, never developing alternatives. When the climate shifted toward dryer conditions, the forest began to transition. The lush deciduous trees gave way to hardier species, but the settlers' infrastructure couldn't adapt quickly enough.

The game trails that had once brought deer through the valley shifted as the animals sought wetter areas. The berry meadows produced less each year. Even the spring that had never failed began to weaken, its flow diminishing as the water table dropped. The trading post, never fully utilized, stood empty as the settlers focused inward, clinging to methods that had served them well in better days.

Haven's Rest's decline was as gradual as its rise. The harvests grew leaner each season. Hunting parties returned empty-handed more often than not. The abandoned trading post's walls, built from their prized oak, weathered unused. When winter came, it found their food stores desperately low. Disease spread through the weakened population, and the harsh season claimed the very young and very old first. By spring, barely half the settlement remained.

Those who survived that winter faced an even harder year ahead. The forest's transformation had accelerated - drought-resistant species replaced their beloved oaks and maples, but these new trees were unfamiliar, their properties unknown. The settlers' tools and techniques, perfected for working with oak and maple, proved poorly suited to these hardy newcomers. More died from accidents with unpredictable wood, while others succumbed to illness from tainted water as the spring weakened further. The empty trading post remained a silent reminder of paths not taken.

Within five years, Haven's Rest had fallen silent. Today, only ruins remain. The granite foundations of their buildings still mark where homes once stood, and the old quarry remains as a silent witness to their industry. Near the valley's entrance, the trading post's weathered frame stands like a monument to missed opportunities. The valley has transformed - now dominated by scrubland and hardy bushes, with only a few stubborn oaks remaining as remnants of the former forest. The stream still flows, though much reduced, and in spring, wildflowers bloom among weathered graves.

Above the valley, carved into the granite they so proudly quarried, remains their motto: "In Nature's Bounty We Trust." The words endure, a stark reminder of the settlement's fate.

## Welcome to Biomebound: Colony Stratum

You stand at the edge of your own valley, resources scattered across the landscape before you. The ruins of Haven's Rest and countless other failed settlements remind us that survival requires more than just abundant resources—it demands wisdom, adaptability, and the courage to forge connections beyond our walls. What path will you choose for your colony?

=> / Begin
